## The Lives of the Saints

### 1. SAINT SIMEON THE GOD-RECEIVER

In the time of the Egyptian king Ptolemy Philadelphus this Simeon was chosen as one of the renowned Seventy, to whom was entrusted the work of translating the Bible from Hebrew into Greek. Simeon did his work conscientiously, but when he was translating the prophet Isaiah, and came to that prophecy: behold, a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, he became confused, and took a knife to erase the word virgin and replace it with the words "young woman", and to translate it thus into Greek. But at that moment God's angel appeared to Simeon and restrained him from his intention, explaining to him that the prophecy was true, and that it was accurately written. And that it is true and accurate, the messenger of God told him further, he will be convinced personally himself, for by God's will he will not die until he sees the Messiah born of a virgin. The righteous Simeon rejoiced at such a voice from heaven, left the prophecy unchanged, and thanked God that He deemed him worthy to live to see the Promised One. When the Infant Jesus was brought by the Virgin Mary to the Jerusalem temple, God's Spirit revealed this to Simeon, who was very old and white as a swan. Simeon quickly went to the temple and in the temple recognized both the Virgin and the Infant by the light that shone around their heads like a halo. The joyful elder took Christ in his arms and entreated God: "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation" (Luke 2:29-30). There also happened to be Anna the prophetess, daughter of Phanuel, who herself also recognized the Messiah and proclaimed Him to the people. Anna was then eighty-four years old. Soon after this Saint Simeon departed. This righteous elder Simeon is considered the protector of small children.

### 2. HOLY MARTYRS ADRIAN AND EUBULUS

These two holy souls had come from their places in Batanea to Caesarea of Cappadocia, to visit the imprisoned Christians in the prison, and to console and encourage them. But they too were seized and condemned to death. Adrian was beheaded by the sword, and Eubulus was cast before wild beasts in the year 309. And thus, not regretting this life, they honorably and joyfully passed into eternal life.

### 3. SAINT JAMES, ARCHBISHOP OF SERBIA

James was archbishop of serbia from 1286 to 1292. Not much is known about him. It is known that he restored and erected churches and that, probably around 1290, he transferred the seat of the Serbian archbishopric from the monastery of Žiča to Peć. He devoted great care to the monastery of Studenica, supplying it with liturgical books and church vessels. He devoted exceptional care to Serbian ascetics. He obtained the halo of sanctity through the purity of his faith and Christian love. He was adorned with meekness, humility and good deeds.

## Hymn of Praise

### Prayer for a Little Child

O Lord mighty, have mercy and save!  
And this little flame do not extinguish with death!  
This little child is like a candle's flame,  
And the worldly storms even reach to the stars;  

The weak fire will hide beneath the ashes  
And beneath Thy hand human souls.  
When the waters rise and reach to the throat,  
And the flame diminishes, and the fire dampens,  

O Lord save, have mercy, assuage!  
Thus David the prophet prayed to Thee  
Though he was a great conflagration,  
And the helpless child at heaven's footstool  

And from evil desire painfully wavers  
And from evil thought his head aches,  
Every little breeze of malice weakens him.  
He would quickly be extinguished by stormy winds,  

If Thou didst not save, O Helper swift.  
O Lord, even now have mercy and save,  
And this little flame do not extinguish with death!  
By the prayers, O God, of Thy aged beloved,  

Simeon the holy, wondrous God-receiver.

## Reflection

What great glory in heaven Saint Simeon the God-receiver, who held the Savior of the world in his arms, obtained is clearly shown by this case, recounted in the life of Saint Peter the Athonite (June 12). As a commander Peter was captured in a battle, chained and cast into prison, in a certain city of Samaria on the bank of the River Euphrates. Imprisoned for a long time Peter prayed with tears to Saint Nicholas to entreat God for him, that he might be freed from prison, vowing in addition that he would devote himself entirely to God. Saint Nicholas appeared to him in a dream and told him that he had prayed to God for him, but that God was delaying his release because he, Peter, had previously made a similar vow to God and had not kept it. And Saint Nicholas further counseled him to pray to Saint Simeon the God-receiver, "who is very powerful before God, and stands near the throne of God together with the Most Holy Virgin and Saint John the Forerunner." Peter obeyed the counsel of Saint Nicholas and began to pray to Saint Simeon. Then Saint Nicholas appeared to him again together with Saint Simeon, and not in a dream but in waking. Peter saw Simeon, wondrous in appearance, bright in face, clothed in the garments of an Old Testament priest, with a golden staff in his hand. Saint Simeon said to Peter: "Will you fulfill your vow and be a monk?" To which Peter answered: "Yes, lord, with God's help." Then Simeon touched Peter's chains with his staff, and the chains melted as if from wax. And the prison doors opened, and the saints led Peter out of the prison.

## Contemplation

Contemplate the Lord Jesus as the cornerstone, namely:
1. As the cornerstone in the building of personal character;
2. As the cornerstone in the building of family and nation;
3. As the cornerstone of every well-intentioned social transformation and human undertaking.

## Homily

### on the Spirit of God who speaks through the spirit-bearers

**Take no thought what ye shall speak... for the Spirit of your Father which speaketh in you** (Matthew 10:19-20)

These are the words of Him who knows all, and who revealed to the world knowledge which no one before His visit to mankind knew. If someone is filled with the Spirit of God, then he does not speak from the human spirit but God's Spirit speaks from him and through him. Then he is only an instrument or lyre of God's Spirit, through which God the Spirit speaks. And when such a man speaks, he speaks infallibly, and no one can find falsehood in his speech except those who by the perversity of their mind consider truth to be falsehood. How people speak who are filled with God's Spirit was clearly shown in the example of the prophets, and even more clearly in the example of the apostles. So strange and incredible did the apostolic words appear to strangers, that is, to those who did not have God's Spirit in them and who knew how to speak only from the earth, that they considered the apostles drunk. Moreover, drunk and ridiculous appeared to ignoramuses all those people also, who first began to speak of the hidden wonders of this physical world, of the power of steam, magnetism, electricity, wireless telegraphy, conversation at a distance. How then should not spiritual people appear drunk and ridiculous, who by God's Spirit speak of the innumerable hidden mysteries of the spiritual kingdom! Whoever humbles himself before God, God makes mighty. Into the humbled heart God's Spirit dwells and from there speaks through human lips. This was confirmed not only in the prophets and apostles but also in numerous sons and daughters of God.

O gracious Lord, do not deprive us of Thy Holy Spirit. To Thee be glory and praise forever. Amen.