## Lives of the Saints

### 1. THE HOLY MARTYR ANYSIA

Anysia was born in Thessalonica of distinguished and wealthy parents, and was raised in the Christian faith. Anysia was orphaned early, and gave herself entirely to contemplation of God and prayer in her home. Inspired by love for Christ Anysia often said: "O false life of the young, for you either scandalize or are scandalized. Old age is better, but, ah, grief seizes me because of the length of time which separates me from the heavenly." Then Anysia sold all her estate and distributed it to the poor, and herself lived from the labor of her own hands. Anysia kept a strict fast, slept very little and unceasingly poured out tears in prayer. When sleep would overcome Anysia, she would say to herself: "It is dangerous to sleep when my enemy is awake." At that time the wicked Emperor Maximian issued a decree that anyone could kill a Christian wherever he saw and met one, without trial and condemnation. Once this holy maiden went out into the street to go to church. That day was the pagan feast of the sun. A certain soldier saw Anysia beautiful in face, and approached Anysia with impure desire and asked Anysia her name. She crossed herself with the sign of the cross and said to him: "I am a handmaid of Christ, and am going to church." When the insolent soldier approached closer and began to speak foolishly to Anysia, she pushed him away and spat in his face. The soldier struck Anysia with his sword below the ribs and pierced her. This holy virgin suffered in the year 298 and was honorably buried by Christians, and crowned by God in the heavenly Kingdom with the crown of glory. Over her grave a church was built.

### 2. VENERABLE THEODORA OF CONSTANTINOPLE

Theodora was a nun and disciple of Saint Basil the New (see March 26). After her death Theodora appeared to Saint Gregory, the student of Basil, and described to Gregory all twenty toll-houses through which her soul had passed before entering eternal rest through the help of the prayers of Saint Basil. Theodora presented herself to God on December 30, 940.

### 3. THE HOLY APOSTLE TIMON

Timon was one of the seven deacons (Acts 6:5) and one of the Seventy Apostles. Appointed as Bishop of Bostra in Arabia, Timon preached the Gospel and endured many torments from pagans. Timon was cast into fire but remained unharmed. Finally Timon died crucified on a cross and passed into the Kingdom of Christ.

### 4. VENERABLE THEODORA OF CAESAREA

After many ascetic labors in the monastery of Saint Anna, Theodora reposed peacefully in the year 755.

### 5. VENERABLE MARTYR GEDEON

Gedeon was by origin a Greek from very poor parents. In his youth Gedeon was forcibly converted to Islam. Repentant, Gedeon fled to the Holy Mountain, where in the monastery of Karakalou Gedeon received the monastic rank. Desirous of martyrdom for Christ, Gedeon took the blessing of his spiritual father and went to that place where Gedeon had been converted to Islam, and publicly before the Turks confessed the Christian faith and reviled Muhammad as a false prophet. The Turks shaved his head, placed Gedeon backwards on a donkey and led him through the city. But Gedeon rejoiced at that mockery for Christ's sake. Afterward they cut off with an axe all his fingers on hands and feet, as once to Saint James the Persian (see November 27), and finally they cast Gedeon into a privy where Gedeon gave up his soul to the holy God, in the year 1818 in the town of Turnovo in Thrace. His wonderworking relics rest in the church of the Holy Apostles in the village of Turnovo, and a portion of his relics is found in the monastery of Karakalou.

## Hymn of Praise

### THE HOLY MARTYR ANYSIA

To God prays holy Anysia  
All kneeling and pouring out tears:  
"O Jesus, God and Lord,  
Wellspring of immortal life,

Treasure of incorrupt riches,  
Help me, O God, help me,  
That unto death I may remain a maiden,  
That as a maiden I may repose

And be deemed worthy of Thy kingdom;  
Grant me, O Savior, Thy grace,  
That for Thee I may suffer,  
That for Thee I may sacrifice myself.

I desire to be a sacrifice to my God,  
O help me to be able what I desire!"  
God heard the maiden Anysia,  
And gave her His grace,

That for Him she might suffer.  
Now in Paradise holy Anysia  
As a star among the stars shines,  
As an angel among the angels gleams,

Praying for us to immortal Christ.

## Reflection

Behold two more examples of how merciful God helps in distress those who hope in Him with faith. Blessed Theodora of Caesarea was born in a noble house and given to the monastery of Saint Anna for upbringing. Theodora not only was raised but also practiced asceticism preparing to receive the monastic rank. Emperor Leo the Isaurian by force extracted Theodora from the monastery and betrothed Theodora to one of his generals. Theodora opposed the marriage with her soul, but was powerless as a lamb in the paws of wolves. She grieved in her heart, unceasingly praying to God that God not abandon her. And on the very day of the wedding, when the guests were feasting, suddenly came news to the emperor that the Scythians had attacked his empire. The emperor commanded that general to immediately go with the army against the Scythians. The general went and never returned, for he perished in war. Thus Saint Theodora was freed by God's help, and as a pure maiden again returned to her monastery, where she took monastic vows and as a nun was glorified by her extraordinary ascetic labors. Another example. In the monastery of the "Sleepless Ones" in a year of famine there was great want. Saint Marcellus the abbot one day received some poor people and gave them hospitality, and wanted to give them also money for the journey. Marcellus asked the monastery's steward how much money there was in all. The steward answered: ten silver pieces. The abbot commanded that all ten be given to those poor people. The steward did not give all ten but nine, and kept one for the needs of the monastery. And the steward was very worried about the monastery, for there was extreme want. At that moment suddenly a certain rich man visited the monastery and brought to the abbot ninety talents of gold. Then the clairvoyant Marcellus summoned the steward and said to him: "Behold, God wished through this pious man to send us one hundred talents, but since you disobeyed me and kept one silver piece, because of that the universal Provider deprived us of ten talents."

## Contemplation

Contemplate the assembly (image) of ascetics, virgins male and female, namely:

1. How from love for Christ they renounced all and gave themselves to voluntary suffering;
2. How they conquered themselves, the world and the devil by steadfast endurance;
3. How they now rejoice in the Kingdom of Christ and help us with their prayers.

## Homily

### on the kingdom of the saints

**But the saints of the most High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever** (Daniel 7:18)

Humbled and oppressed in earthly kingdoms, the saints will reign eternally in the heavenly Kingdom. Last on earth, they will rejoice as first in heaven. Hungry and thirsty and barefoot and naked in passing kingdoms, they will be as royal sons, satisfied and clothed in royal garments in the imperishable kingdom. Strangers in perishable kingdoms, they will be masters in their own kingdom, in the imperishable kingdom. This is the last kingdom, and indeed the only one which can be called a kingdom. All else is transience, temporary school, deception and vanity. For the eternal kingdom of the saints there are recruited on earth citizens from all earthly kingdoms and from all times. These are the sons and daughters of Christ the Savior, the children of the living God. Those of them who have moved from this life to that one, even now reign, but not yet has been shown all the splendor and all the greatness of their reigning. That will be shown at the second coming of Christ, the Judge of the living and the dead. Then will be shown all the splendor and all the greatness of the kingdom of the saints. This is the eternal kingdom of Christ our God. Of that kingdom there will be neither change nor end for ever and ever.

O Lord Jesus, Builder of the kingdom of the saints, have mercy also on us sinners and prepare us for the eternal kingdom of Thy saints. To Thee be glory and praise forever. Amen.